---
layout: default
title: What is a population
parent: Theoretical background
nav_order: 4
---

# What is a population

This is one of the most important concepts to agree on before searching for data.  The definition of a population does differ depending on the species (e.g. the spatial extent for a tree population and a salamander may not be the same) but here follows some general guidance.

Briefly, ‘population’ refers to a genetically distinct group of individuals.  Within populations the individuals are capable of interbreeding.  Genetic distinction of populations is usually due to no or very low gene flow (movement of genes e.g. by movement of offspring) and/or significant adaptive differences, such as due to occurring in different environments (high/ low altitude, different soil types, differences in precipitation or temperature).  Not every occurrence is a population (see Appendix)!  The word ‘subpopulation’ may describe clusters of organisms across a landscape (including family units) which are near enough to exchange gene flow. Usually several ‘subpopulations’ are considered together as a population (also called a ‘metapopulation’). When the potential for gene flow is large, e.g., viable tree pollen that can travel tens of kilometers, ‘populations’ can range across large distances, sometimes hundreds of km. 

{: .important } 
In IUCN Red List reports the term ‘population’ and ‘subpopulation’ are used differently than intended in this study. An ‘IUCN population’ refers to the entire species (i.e., the total number of individuals of the taxon). ‘IUCN subpopulations’ are geographically or otherwise distinct groups of the species between which there is little exchange (IUCN 1995);  thus an ‘IUCN subpopulation’ is what we refer to as ‘populations’! 

Some published reports will clearly define what a population is based on the knowledge of biodiversity and taxonomic experts.  Some judgment may be required in interpreting population designation in a report, but in general the designation of a population by experts should be considered strongly.  In other cases, the reports or database may not clearly designate population boundaries and will require interpretation.  Visual examination of maps may result in ‘merging’ occurrences that are likely to experience extensive gene flow- ‘likely to experience extensive gene flow’ may be defined on spatial proximity e.g. close geographic distance and lack of clear barrier (mountain, fence, etc.). 

The distance between subpopulations (or discrete habitat patches where the species occurs) can be used as a proxy to evaluate to what extent subpopulations are likely functionally connected. When the edge of a subpopulation is within a reasonable dispersal distance (for that particular species, a distance within which some 75-90% of realized dispersal distances occur- expert discretion is fine here) of another subpopulation edge, and there are no known physical barriers impeding dispersal, the subpopulations can be considered as part of the same metapopulation. Common trees may disperse pollen tens to hundreds of kilometers, while salamanders or frogs may be dispersing kilometers or less, while wolves may disperse hundreds of kilometers.  Designation of populations should consider human induced gene flow e.g. genetic rescue, translocations etc. Experts in the species type (e.g. amphibians) and/or text from the data source can help identify populations.  

Some examples may help.  A population may consist of a cluster of individuals in a discrete location like an island, lake, river catchment or forest preserve, separate from other discrete locations by some tens of kilometers.  A population may constitute a metapopulation consisting of subpopulations (ponds, prairies, etc.) that are separate but not very far (hundreds of meters to several kilometers), thus capable of exchanging at least 1 migrant (one reproductive adult moving between patches) on average per generation with each other.  Well connected subpopulations are sufficiently close for the metapopulation to be called a population, and the population size should be considered the sum of the subpopulations, which may cover tens or hundreds of kilometers.  

Genetic data can help define populations, but should be used with some caution.  Whether genetic data can detect genetic differences can be a consequence of the type of genetic marker- genomic level markers can detect very fine genetic divisions, including between subpopulations.  Not every genetic distinction according to DNA markers is a population.  The threshold should still be considered roughly less than 1 migrant per generation (on average).  Older genetic markers such as chloroplast and mitochondrial DNA sequence are useful in identifying highly genetically distinct populations.

Populations of common, abundant species with large continuous spatial distributions that are much larger than the dispersal capacity of a single individual (e.g. less than 1 migrant per generation across the extent) are also considered as metapopulations.  When very large continuous populations exist, e.g. hundreds of kilometers, then population boundaries should be instituted based on expected adaptive or other differences, e.g. ecological changes such as ecoregions.

Metapopulations should represent stable spatial and temporal units. Many species have ephemeral subpopulations in dynamic source-sink metapopulations- a sink is a spatial location receiving high immigration from adjacent areas and which would not persist on its own without immigration.  Sinks are not distinct populations. The conglomerate of connected subpopulations that should be evaluated as a population.

For freshwater fish, the riverscape structure can help define populations or units that can be assimilated to populations/metapopulations with a little GIS work with existing databases (which may have Nc data as well, such as useful databases here and here for fish). Individuals inhabiting lakes can be considered as populations, especially for lakes that are disconnected from the hydrographical network. Riverscape (meta)populations can also be defined through their level of connection/disconnection e.g. belonging to different river basins, hydrographical systems, river stretches separated by huge dams, etc.
For trees, the pollination mode and commonness is important.  Trees which are wind-pollinated can have continuous populations extend over tens of kilometers, and farther.  Trees which are insect pollinated generally but not always, have less gene flow.  For common trees, a distinct population may not be easily apparent (e.g. trees that extend across much of a continent in a continuous fashion).  In such cases, a “population” may be considered at approximately the level of a state, country, or ecoregion (hundreds of kilometers across).

For amphibians, dispersal capability may vary greatly between species. Toads, for example, are known to be long distance dispersers and, provided they have access to resources, such as water bodies to breed, a single population (meta-population) may span 100s to 1000s of kilometers. Salamanders on the other hand tend to have lower dispersal capabilities, with dispersal often negligible at distances greater than 1.5 km. As such, wetlands within 1 km from each other are likely to constitute a metapopulation. Because amphibians must live in or around freshwater, their dispersal can be constrained when water sources are distant from each other or separated by barriers (e.g., mountain ranges or valleys, highways). 

For small mammals habitat specialization and structure are determining factors. In some species, stepping stone dispersal can lead to large contiguous populations, despite restrictions on individual movements that may be limited to at most tens of kilometers. Some species display sex-biased dispersal.
For large mammals, despite greater dispersal ability, many species show habitat specialization.  Therefore populations can be connected to different degrees depending on barriers to dispersal. Some habitats are naturally or anthropogenically fragmented (e.g. dense forest separated by agriculture). Fences can also disrupt natural movement patterns. In such instances it is possible to implement metapopulation management, mimicking natural movements between historically connected populations through translocations or dispersal corridors. Some species solely exist in fenced areas; where good records exist, all remnants can together be considered a population.

Defining marine species can be challenging due to environmental barriers found in open or pelagic ocean environments, and due to migration to and from breeding areas. Barriers are often related to temperature, current or depth. Marine species range from very small to large and their dispersal also likewise range from local to planktonic dispersal for many days on currents to traversing the length of a hemisphere. It is important to understand breeding/spawning areas and dispersal patterns/capabilities and environmental covariates to help determine genetically related populations. These distinctions may not be easily defined and some populations may have more or less continuous distributions.  In such cases, a “population” may be considered at approximately the level of a state, country, or biogeographic region (hundreds of kilometers across).
